{Error Handling} Developer guidelines to onboad the new error output (#15774)
Azure/azure-cli: doc/error_handling_guidelines.md

# Azure CLI Error Handling Guidelines

This document aims to provide the guidelines for command group authors to onboard the error handling method and the new error output format.

> Previously in Azure CLI, `CLIError` was widely used to wrap the error messages after different kinds of error types being caught. Now, `CLIError` is deprecated and it is replaced by a set of new designed error types, which will provide more clear structures for error categorizing and also more actionable error outputs for user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously in Azure CLI, `CLIError` was widely used to wrap error messages after different kinds of error types are being caught. Now, `CLIError` is deprecated and replaced by a set of newly designed error types, which will provide clearer structures for error categorizing and also more actionable error outputs for better user experience.
```

> Previously in Azure CLI, `CLIError` is widely used to wrap the error messages after the different kinds of error types being caught. Now, `CLIError` is deprecated and it is replaced by a set of new designed error types, which will provide more clear structures for error categorizing and also more actionable error outputs for user experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously in Azure CLI, `CLIError` was widely used to wrap the error messages after different kinds of error types being caught. Now, `CLIError` is deprecated and it is replaced by a set of new designed error types, which will provide more clear structures for error categorizing and also more actionable error outputs for user experience.
```

> For the new commands authoring, here are what need to be done to get on board. __Any PRs not following rules here will be rejected.__ For the existing `CLIError` in command groups, command group owners should schedule to replace them with the new error types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the new commands authoring, here are what need to be done to get onboard. __Any PRs not following these rules here will be rejected.__ For the existing `CLIError` in command groups, command group owners should schedule to replace them with the new error types.
```

> For the new commands authoring, here are what need to be done to get on board. __Any PRs not following rules here will be rejected.__ For the existing `CLIError` in command groups, command group owners should schedule to replace them with the new error types.

Reviewer 3: How about extensions? They need to update the minimum version in metadata if they want to use the new error type, right?

Author: Theoretically yes. 

But if we force the extensions to use the new error types, it will make the extensions not compitable to the old versions of AzureCLI. This may need more discussions

> 1. [__Mandatory__] Use the new designed error types instead of CLIError, detail section [here](#Error-Type)
> 2. [__Mandatory__] Follow the error message authoring guidelines, detail section [here](#Error-Message)
> 3. [__Recommended__] Provide recommendations for users to take action, detail section [here](#Error-Recommendation)

Reviewer: Avoid using "here".

```suggestion
1. [__Mandatory__] Use the newly designed error types instead of `CLIError`. See section [Error Type](#Error-Type)
2. [__Mandatory__] Follow the error message authoring guidelines. See section [Error Message](#Error-Message)
3. [__Recommended__] Provide recommendations for users to take action. See section [Error Recommendation](#Error-Recommendation)
```

> 3. [__Recommended__] Provide recommendations for users to take action. See section [Error Recommendation](#Error-Recommendation)

Author: I think `recommended` could encourage developers to follow, while `optional` may not, what do you think? :)

## Error Type

### Available Error Types

> The new designed error types are provided in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py), where the error types are defined in three layers with their structures below. `AzCLIError` is the base layer for all the new defined error types. The second layer includes the main categories (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`), which can be shown to users and also can be used for Telemetry analysis. __The third layer includes the specific error types, which are the ones command group authors can use when raising errors.__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The newly designed error types are provided in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py), where the error types are defined in three layers with their structures shown below. `AzCLIError` is the base layer for all the newly defined error types. The second layer includes the main categories (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`), which can be shown to users and also can be used for Telemetry analysis. __The third layer includes the specific error types, which are the ones command group authors can use when raising errors.__
```

```
| -- AzCLIError                                 # [Base Layer]: DO NOT use it in command groups
|    | -- UserFault                             # [Second Layer]: DO NOT use it in command groups
|    |    | -- CommandNotFoundError             # [Third Layer]: Can be used in command groups
|    |    | -- UnrecognizedArgumentError
|    |    | -- RequiredArgumentMissingError
|    |    | -- MutuallyExclusiveArgumentError
|    |    | -- InvalidArgumentValueError
|    |    | -- ArgumentParseError               # fallback of argument related errors
|    |    | -- BadRequestError
|    |    | -- UnauthorizedError
|    |    | -- ForbiddenError
|    |    | -- ResourceNotFoundError
|    |    | -- AzureResponseError               # fallback of response related errors

> |    |    | -- AzureConnectionError

Reviewer 2: I am a user. I am angry when you say errors like connection error, response error are my fault. It is Azure's fault.

Author: ConnectionError:
Consider the user's network issues, SSL errors etc. Azure should not be blamed.

ResponseError:
which already excludes the 5xx error, it's a fallback of the response related errors

Reviewer 2: When Azure is down, I will also get a connection error?

Author: You could catch the case when Azure is down and raise `ServiceInternalError`

|    |    | -- ClientRequestError               # fallback of request related errors
|    |    | -- ValidationError                  # fallback of validation related errors
|    |    | -- ManualInterrupt
|    |    | -- ... More ...
|    | -- ClientError
|    |    | -- CLIInternalError
|    | -- ServiceError
|    |    | -- AzureInternalError
```

To summarize, here is a list of rules for command group authors to select a proper error type.
- __DO NOT__ use the error types defined in the base layer and the second layer
- Consider defining a new error type if you can not find a proper one when it is a general error
- Avoid using the fallback error types unless you can not find a proper one and the error is not general enough for a new error type

### Apply the Error Type

> Applying the new error types is just as easy as using CLIError. Wherever an CLIError could appear, you can use the new error types to replace it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applying the new error types is just as easy as using `CLIError`. Wherever an `CLIError` could appear, you can use the new error types to replace it.
```

> For example, previously, you may raise CLIError in this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, previously, you may raise `CLIError` in this way.
```

> ```

Reviewer: You may add `py` after ` ``` ` to enable code highlighting.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```

err_msg = 'the specified resource group ... not exist'
raise CLIError(err_msg)
```

Now, you could use the new error type in this way.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```

from azure.cli.core.azclierror import ResourceNotFoundError

err_msg = 'the specified resource group ... not exist'
raise ResourceNotFoundError(err_msg)
```

The new error types all have the same signature for `__init__` function shown below. When an error is raised, you are highly recommended to provide some recommendations for users to take action if the error message is not clear enough for users to know what to do next.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```

__init__(self, error_msg, recommendation=None):
```
- `error_msg`: _string_, _required_. A clear message shown to users what the error is.
- `recommendation`: _string_ or _list_, _optional_. Recommendations telling users what action to take.

### Add a New Error Type

> If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should be inherited from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should inherit from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).
```

> If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should be inherited from one of the errors define in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should be inherited from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).
```

> If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should inherit from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).

Author: Do we need provide the contact in the doc?

> If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should inherit from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).

Reviewer 4: is it ok for you? pls leave a team contact info here?

> If there is not a proper error type for your case and the error is general enough, consider defining a new error type in [azure/cli/core/azclierror.py](https://github.com/Azure/azure-cli/blob/dev/src/azure-cli-core/azure/cli/core/azclierror.py). The defined error type should inherit from one of the errors defined in the second layer (`UserFault`, `ClientError`, `ServiceError`).

Author: Let's just leave the team contact here :)

For example, a new error type can be defined in this way.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```

class NewErrorTypeName(UserFault):
    """ A description of new error type. """
    pass
```

## Error Message

> A clear and actionable error message is very important when raising an error, so make sure your error message describes clearly what the error is and provide users what they need to do if possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A clear and actionable error message is very important when raising an error, so make sure your error message describes clearly what the error is and tells users what they need to do if possible.
```

A general pattern is provided here, keep it in mind when you write an error message.

1. __What the error is.__
2. __Why it happens.__
3. __What users need to do to fix it.__

Below are the specific DOs and DON'Ts when writing the error messages. PRs violate rules here will be rejected.

__DOs__
- Use the capital letter ahead of an error message.

__DON'Ts__
- Do not control the style of an error message. (e.g, the unnecessary `'\n'` and the colorization.)
- Do not include the error type info in an error message. (e.g, `usage error: --ids | --name [--resource-group]`)

> - Do not use a formula-like or a programming expression in the error message. (e.g, `Parameter 'resource_group_name' must conform to the following pattern: '^[-\\w\\._\\(\\)]+$'`)

Reviewer 4: [thumb up]

- Do not use ambiguous expressions which mean nothing to users. (e.g, `Something unexpected happens.`)

## Error Recommendation

> When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they are encountering. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying a recommendation property when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.

Author: ```suggestion
When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they are encountering. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying a recommendation property when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. And in both cases, you can either provide a single recommendation with a string or multiple recommendations with a string list. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.
```

Author: @qwordy Add the description to provide multiple recommendations here.

> When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they are encountering. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying a recommendation property when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they encountered. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying the `recommendation` parameter when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.
```

> When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they encountered. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying the `recommendation` parameter when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.

Author: ```suggestion
When necessary, it is highly suggested for command group authors to provide recommendations for users to resolve the errors they encountered. It is also suggested that we split the error message itself from the recommendations, which can be done either by specifying the `recommendation` parameter when initiating an error type or using the `set_recommendation` function after an error is initiated. In both cases, you can either provide a single recommendation with a string or multiple recommendations with a string list. The recommendations you provide will be printed right below the error message, one recommendation in a new line.
```

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```

from azure.cli.core.azclierror import MutuallyExclusiveArgumentError

error_msg = 'Please specify all of (--publisher, --offer, --sku, --version), or --urn'
recommendation = 'Try to use --urn publisher:offer:sku:version only'

> raise MutuallyExclusiveArgumentError(err_msg, recommendation)

Reviewer 2: How to add multiple recommendations?

Author: good catch!
I will add a description for this but may not a code snippet because I can not find the case we need to provide multiple recommendations right now.

```

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```Python
```
